#DocumentType: CGG Article                   
#Title: Can Angels Marry Women?


<>



</>

 There were  giants on the earth in those days, and also afterward, when the sons of  God came in to the daughters of men and they bore children to them. (Genesis 6:4)  The opening verses of Genesis 6 have been a stumbling block for many Bible readers through the ages. Instead of scouring the Bible for scriptural clues to their true meaning, many have allowed their imaginations and faulty reasoning to invent sometimes wild and fantastic interpretations of them. They either ignore or do not realize that God's Word contradicts their readings of this passage:  Now it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born to them, that the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were beautiful; and they took wives for themselves of all whom they chose. And the LORD said, My Spirit shall not strive with man forever, for he is indeed flesh; yet his days shall be one hundred and twenty years. There were giants on the earth in those days, and also afterward, when the sons of God came into the daughters of men and they bore children to them. These were the mighty men who were of old, men of renown. (Genesis 6:1-4)  Many people believe that these sons of God were fallen angels who married beautiful, earthly women-daughters of men. This fanciful idea sounds familiar, a echo of classical mythology, in which the gods seduced human women, who afterward bore demigods who grew up to be mighty men and men of renown. It is a common theme in those Greek and Roman tales. The basic idea of this interpretation is that, as a result of these unions between angels and women, the children produced were called Nephilim, a Hebrew word that means giants. Apparently, through their natural gifts inherited from their angelic fathers, these half-angel/half-human beings became powerful, famous men, doers of great exploits. We have only to recall the stories of Hercules, Perseus, or Achilles to understand this explanation of these verses. It is surprising how many people across the breadth of religiosity believe this pagan understanding. It almost seems as if they want to believe it, not because it is true, which it is not, but because it is sensational and exciting like the old mythological stories that tickle the fancy rather than speak the truth. But there are good reasons that refute this all-too-common interpretation of Genesis 6:4. These reasons allow the Bible to interpret itself and adhere to spiritual and scientific principles. We will consider four of them. Sons of God First, who were-and were not-these sons of God? The exact phrase, sons of God, appears eleven times in the Bible. Of the other nine appearances of the phrase outside of the two in Genesis 6, angels are called sons of God (bene h&#257;'el&omacr;him) in three times in the book of Job (Job 1:6; 2:1; 38:7), and Psalms 29:1 and 89:6 are additional examples of this usage. In places like Deuteronomy 14:1 and 32:8 (sons of the LORD your God), the phrase refers to the children of Israel. In the Greek New Testament, converted Christians are also called sons of God (huioi theou; see Matthew 5:9; Luke 20:36; Romans 8:14, 19; Galatians 3:26). Unconverted men are called sons of God as well, although, in some places, the exact phrasing is not used. For example, the idea of sons of God appears in Malachi 2:10, speaking of the unfaithful Jews of the prophet's time: Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us? We can find a similar meaning in Psalm 82:6-7: I said, You are gods, and all of you are children of the Most High. But you shall die like men . . ..' In the New Testament, the evangelist Luke calls Adam the son of God in Luke 3:38. Two Different Lines of Descent Yet there is another option, which is to read sons of God to refer to a particular physical line of descent. After Cain slew his brother, he went out from the presence of the LORD (Genesis 4:16). Although God punished Cain for his  sin, this verse demonstrates that he left God's presence willingly. He traveled to the land of Nod on the east of Eden. There he married a woman, had a son (and additional children), and founded a society in opposition to God. In any case, his actions show that he distanced himself from God as far as he could. The rest of the passage, Genesis 4:16-24, tells of an ungodly world that sprang from him and his turning his back on Eden. It is based on physical accomplishments, as exemplified by Cain's descendants.  Moses relates the first example of polygamy when Lamech took two wives, and later, the same unrepentant descendant of Cain also commits murder, apparently in revenge. The verse (Genesis 4:23) could suggest that he may have committed at least two murders. Lamech's sons were quite accomplished: Jabal originated nomadic herding of livestock. Jubal invented harp and flute music. Tubal-Cain instructed craftsmen in working with bronze and iron. In other words, they were their time's talented and famous men, but they rose to prominence in a godless and amoral society. To close the chapter, in Genesis 4:25-26, Moses contrasts Cain's line and its deeds with another line of descent. He writes that Eve bore another son after the murder of Abel, whom she named Seth, saying, God has appointed another seed for me instead of Abel, whom Cain killed. Seth means appointed. He, then, essentially took the place of the self-exiled firstborn, Cain, and the dead second-born, Abel. He was the son who would become chief over Adam's family. In the days of Enosh, Seth's son, men began to call on the name of the LORD (Genesis 4:26). Many commentators say that Enosh means weak or frail man; mortal, sickly man, but a related word in Arabic, anas, means to be sociable and familiar . . . not only in civil but in religious things (Gill's Exposition of the Entire Bible). Gill extrapolates that in Enosh's time, the families of good men being larger, and more numerous, they joined together in social and public worship in contrast to the descendants of Cain. Their aims seem to have been for personal enrichment and empowerment. Gill proposes that, at this time, Seth's progeny began to identify themselves by or with the name of the Lord. Considering it this way, these sons of God, the descendants of Seth, were distinct from the sons of men, the descendants of Cain. Through Seth's line, our Savior was born, as Noah and his family were among his descendants. It appears from what the Bible tells us that none of Cain's descendants, the sons of men, survived the Flood. It was their sinful lifestyle that God had to destroy to preserve the human race (Genesis 6:5-7). Kind After Kind A second fact that precludes angels from being the fathers of these men of renown is that angels cannot reproduce.  Jesus tells us in Mark 12:25 that in the resurrection, human beings will be like the angels in heaven, who neither marry nor are given in marriage. His statement very clearly contradicts the angelic interpretation of Genesis 6:2, which states that the sons of God (bene h&#257;'el&omacr;him) married the daughters of men (ben&ocirc;t h&#257;'&#257;d&#257;m). In Genesis, a principle that surfaces early is that a created kind only reproduces after its own kind. This physical law means that one class of creature can mate and reproduce among its own class: Cats can only mate with other cats and produce kittens; dogs can only mate with other dogs and produce puppies-but cats and dogs cannot produce a strange hybrid of their very different species. This principle is established scientific fact. That humans are fleshly, physical beings is evident in Genesis 2. In Genesis 2:7, Moses writes, The LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground. Later, when God formed Eve out of Adam's rib (verse 21), Adam exclaimed about her, This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. The carnality or fleshiness of humanity is made countless times throughout Scripture. Yet, Psalm 104:4 confirms that God makes His angels spirits, His ministers a flame of fire, and Hebrews 1:14 confirms this fact: Are [angels] not all ministering spirits . . .? (emphasis ours throughout). Since human beings are composed of flesh and angels of spirit, they cannot be of the same kind. Angels cannot impregnate mortal women and produce anything. It is not possible for two distinct kinds to mate and reproduce. Giants on the Earth Third, were angels and human females able to reproduce, their children would not be human but some weird hybrid, half-angel/half-human. God, however, tells us that the progeny of the sons of God and daughters of men were human. Where is this? In the very context! Notice verse 1: Now it came to pass when men began to multiply on the face of the earth . . . and also verse 3: And the LORD said, My Spirit shall not strive with man forever. And Moses writes plainly in verse 4 of the children who were born to them, these giants: Those were the mighty men who were of old, men of renown. The children of these unions were not angels, not hybrids, but men. Genesis 6:4 points out that these giants were the result when the sons of God came in to the daughters of men. A phrase like this is a common term in the  Old Testament for sexual intercourse (Genesis 16:4; 29:23, 30; 30:4; 38:2, 9; 38:18; etc.). Such a description of the process of human insemination eliminates any so-called spiritual-or even magical-conception that would supersede the normal human method of impregnation. Giants is the translation of the Hebrew word nephilim. The Greek translation is gigantes, from which we derive the English word, giants. However, the Hebrew word seems to have its roots in naphal, which means to fall, and some translations render it fallen ones. The sense may be that such men of renown fell in battle or fell upon their enemies. Another sense is that they were a fallen form of humanity, that is, they had declined far from what God wanted men to be. Verse 4 is not the only place where the word nephilim appears in the Bible. The same author, Moses, recording the words of the spies he had sent out, writes in Numbers 13:33: And there we saw the giants [nephilim], the sons of Anak, which come of the giants [nephilim], and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight. These Nephilim were the sons of Anak, son of Arba (see Joshua 15:13-14; 21:11). Easton's Bible Dictionary identifies the Anakim as probably a remnant of the original inhabitants of Palestine before the Canaanites, a Cushite tribe from Babel, and of the same race as the Phoenicians and the Egyptian shepherd kings. If this is so, the giants in Moses' day were descended from Cush, not fallen angels. The Nephilim were human. Denying the Gospel Finally, bene h&#257;'el&omacr;him, sons of God, cannot refer to angels in Genesis 6:4 because it warps God's ultimate plan for humanity's salvation. He states His purpose in Genesis 1:26, Let us create man in Our image, according to Our likeness. In other words, God is reproducing Himself! Human beings are not fashioned after the angel-kind but after the Godkind! Notice how God introduces His earlier creations: Let the earth bring forth grass . . . (Genesis 1:11); Let the waters abound with an abundance of living creatures . . . (Genesis 1:20); and Let the earth bring forth the living creature according to its kind . . . (Genesis 1:24). But when He begins to create man, He reveals that He brought humanity from Himself. While Adam was made of the dust to be physical, his origins in terms of image and likeness came directly from God. Because of this vast difference, God commands that men-His potential spiritual children-have dominion over all living things on the earth (Genesis 1:26, 28). As we have long taught, God is recreating Himself. The concept of angels reproducing themselves through interspecies marriages with humans denies the very gospel of the  Kingdom of God, the good news that God offers human beings the opportunity to join His Family and inherit all things. Angelic/human hybrids insert an alien element into the plan of God, which He would never allow to confuse matters. In addition, while angels are called sons of God, they do not have the potential humans have. They were created, not as potential members of the God Family, but as servants. As the author of Hebrews writes:  For to which of the angels did He ever say: You are My Son,Today I have begotten You? . . . And of the angels He says: Who makes His angels spiritsAnd His ministers a flame of fire. . . . But to which of the angels has He ever said: Sit as My right hand,Till I make Your enemies Your footstool? Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for those who will inherit salvation?  It is plain that God never intended that angels, though presently far exceeding humans in intellect, power, and  wisdom, be born into God's Family and inherit the Kingdom of God (Hebrews 2:5). The Bible consistently shows them in the form of mighty servants who carry out God's will and help Him fulfill His purpose. As the author of Hebrews goes on to say, while currently lower than the angels, human beings will one day rise to be greater than they, crowned with glory and honor and possessing power over the works of God's hands (Hebrews 2:6-8). In summary, then, the descendants of Seth (sons of God) saw the beauty of the daughters of Cain (daughters of men). They married and had children with them, and their offspring became great and mighty men in an evil world. God soon decided to destroy the men He had created because their wickedness had grown so great that  repentance was all but impossible for them. He desires all men to come to repentance (2 Peter 3:9), so He destroyed that world, killing all but eight humans, to preserve its inhabitants for the Great White Throne Judgment period, when they will have their opportunity for salvation (see Revelation 20:11-13). A Cautionary Tale Genesis 6:1-4 is a cautionary tale for God's elect. The apostle Paul warns us in 2 Corinthians 6:14, Do not be unequally yoked together with unbelievers [apistos, unfaithful, faithless]. For what fellowship has righteousness with lawlessness? And what communion has light with darkness? When God's people rub elbows too much with sinful society, it tends to bring them down into sin rather than bring the sinners up to live in righteousness (see the illustration in Haggai 2:10-14). This principle is one of the last God gives us in His Book: Come out of her [Babylon the Great], my people, lest you share in her sins, and lest you receive of her plagues (Revelation 18:4). We need to heed the warning that the descendants of Seth ignored and come out of  this world and its beliefs and cultures because, while we may live in it, we are not of it (John 15:19; 17:14, 16; 1 John 2:15-17). 


